Blog: Feld Thoughts (http://www.feld.com/wp/)
Blogger: Brad Feld
Journalist: Jason Karpf
Editor: Scott DeVaney

Proposed Title: “Brad Feld’s Burning Entrepreneur: How to Launch, Fund, and Set Your Start-Up On Fire”

Book Purpose: 
The best articles on building your start-up. Advice should be framed "chronologically" from beginning to end that cover not only the most important steps to take, but also the most unique approaches Brad offers in his posts. This blog-to-book should really focus on trying to pull the personal experiences he uses throughout to highlight an actionable road map.

Publication Schedule
Material Due
Due Date
Completed?
Outline: Chapters identified and organized listing posts; blurb describing each chapter objective/takeaways.
Thurs, 1/13 @ 5pm PST
JK
1st Draft: All chapters & sections complete; Typo-free; ID areas where need blogger input. Must read like a story.
Tues, 1/17 @ 5pm PST

Hyperink 1st Edit
Thurs, 1/19 @ 5pm PST

2nd Draft: All edits resolved; additional proofread, formatted, images input, links active.
Mon, 1/23 @ 5pm PST

Hyperink 2nd Edit; sent to blogger for approval
Mon, 1/23



*There may be an additional pass after the manuscript is sent to the blogger for approval.
	•	Add your initials to the “Completed?” column after you complete each step.
	•	Notify me ASAP if you don’t think you can meet a deadline.
	•	There’ll be a round of edits after each draft.
	•	You’ll generally have until the end of the next day after receiving edits (you’ll receive an email) to resolve each round of edits. We’ll give you more time if the required edits are extensive.
	•	We’ll edit a draft until it meets our final draft quality standards. This may take one round of edits, or ten (the average is 2-3). It depends on the quality of your 1st draft and revisions.
	•	If your first draft’s quality is especially low, we may decide to cancel your assignment.



Outline
Instructions

About The Blog/About The Author
Instructions

Beyond the Blog Chapters
Instructions

dialogue Between Readers
Instructions

Questions For Blogger
Instructions

Adding Images
Instructions

Editor’s Note: Composition
Instructions

Book Description
Instructions

Related Content/Additional Reading
Instructions

	•	Add your initials to the “Completed?” column after you complete each section.
	•	Double-check the instructions before adding your initials.

Payment Details:
Flat Fee
$400
	•	Verify that the payment details here are correct.

Required Reading:
	•	Hyperink House Style Guide (Read This)
	•	About The Assignment Google Doc (Read This)
	•	Receiving Payments (Read This)
	•	General Guidelines For Formatting And Style (Read This)

Begin Composing Outline & Manuscript Here:


The best thinking on how to be a successful entrepreneur from “Feld Thoughts,”
the blog of noted tech investor Brad Feld.
 
Book Description

The Burning Man, the storied ritual of self-expression, has evolved into The Burning Entrepreneur, the ultimate self-expression through start-up success. Renowned tech investor and start-up guru Brad Feld lights YOU on fire with this insider’s book that will teach you how to launch, fund and run your own company. If you’re already an entrepreneur or have always dreamed of being one, douse yourself in “Feld Thoughts” and catch the spark. You’ll be burning, entrepreneur, with this e-book!

About the Author

(Bio info from blog)

Introduction

(About the blog and the e-book. Explain that the book is more than just “a business plan.” It’s an attitude plan for entrepreneurs.)

 
Chapter 1: “Be On Fire”

This first chapter defines the burning entrepreneur (and there really is no other kind). The required attitude and dedication are described up front to set the tone for the rest of the book.

Source posts:

Above-titled guest post with illustrations, Oct. 25, 2011
 
If You Aren’t on the Edge, You’re Taking Up Too Much Space, June 19, 2011
 
Chapter 2: “Be in Love with Your Business”

You can’t be a burning entrepreneur until you’re in love with your business. And you can’t be in love with your business unless it serves the right purpose in your customers’ lives and your life. Chapter 2 provides the checklist for taking the steps in your company and yourself to ensure that you fall in love with your business.

Source posts:

Above-titled post, August 8, 2011
 
Intrinsic Motivation, October 11, 2010
 
Chapter 3: “Don’t Be in the 99%”
 
You can’t be a burning entrepreneur unless you’re “all in” with your decisions and commitment. Forget about the way you hedged your bets when you worked for someone else. Chapter 3 will eliminate the hesitation (even if it’s a 1% hesitation) bred in the corporate world. A burning entrepreneur can hold nothing back!

Source posts:

The Dynamics of a 99% Committer, July 1, 2011
 
Tenacious and Oblivious, September 27, 2011
 
Chapter 4: “Ignorance is Success”
 
Conventional wisdom is for cube dwellers and butt kissers, not for burning entrepreneurs. Such “wisdom” frequently comes from reading Wall Street tea leaves and hanging on every word of self-appointed pundits. Ignorance is success when you ignore the data dumps, the talking heads and the naysayers. Clear the air so your fire can burn!

Source posts:

I Encourage Entrepreneurs to Ignore the Word “Bubble,” April 3, 2011
 
Public Service Announcement for Entrepreneurs: Ignore the Dow, August 5, 2011
 
Chapter 5: Meet the New Boss, Not the Same as the Old Boss

Do NOT morph into every manager and executive you’ve ever hated. Do NOT become the type of “leader” who gets ahead in the traditional corporate world by enshrining mediocrity and exterminating talent. A burning entrepreneur must be a new type of CEO and demand similar innovation from the core team. (BTW, org charts make great kindling for your flame!)

Source posts:

Be the CEO of Your Job, February 2, 2010
 
Learning Leadership from the Movie “13 Days,” June 13, 2010
 
The Power of a CEO 360 Review, December 9, 2010
 
Does Your VP of HR report to Your CEO? June 13, 2011
 
Title Inflation Emerges with a Vengeance, May 23, 2011
 
Chapter 6: “It’s The Product, Stupid”
 
The title of this e-book may be The Burning Entrepreneur, but it’s really not about you. It’s about the product -- the refuses-to-suck offering that brings you dollars and evangelists. Make sure that product is designed, priced and presented to delight your customers.

Source posts:

My Obsession with the Product, May 3, 2010
 
Start with Customer Experience, September 4, 2011
 
What’s Your Product Cadence? April 6, 2011
 
Should You Charge More for the Product?, August 14, 2010
 
Chapter 7: “I Don’t Hate Marketing, Neither Should You”

Buzz, coolness factor, community -- these things don’t happen by accident. Marketing is not just reserved for the corporate world (actually... the lousy, old-school variety is). Start-ups need marketing, the type that’s authentic, the type that burns.

Source posts:

I Don’t Hate Marketing, February 22, 2011
 
Why a New Start-Up Shouldn’t Have a Marketing Budget, February 25, 2011
 
Early Stage Marketing and Sales, The “Why” Versus the “What,” December 15, 2004
 
Are Customers Your Best Marketing? November 10, 2005
 
Show, Don’t Tell, Especially In Video Pitches, February 22, 2010
 
Chapter 8, “OK, It’s Really the Money, Stupid”

Despite everything this book does to get you to work on yourself, your products, and most importantly, your customers, we know what’s really on your mind -- the capital you need to start and sustain your venture. This chapter explains the lifeblood dollars and the people behind them. And remember, investors want to see a burning entrepreneur!

Source posts:

How to Raise Capital as a First-Time Entrepreneur, May 8, 2009
 
What’s the Best Structure for a Pre-VC Investment? February 25, 2006
 
The Priorities of a Venture Capitalist, August 15, 2008

Warning to All Entrepreneurs about Bad Investor Behavior, June 30, 2011
 
Some Complexities in Venture Capital Seed Investing, October 18, 2009
 
Give Your VCs Assignments, May 5, 2010
 
Don’t Forget to Bootstrap, November 9, 2011
 
Chapter 9, “Keeping Your House in Order”

Amid the passion of being an entrepreneur, don’t forget about the “mundane” stuff that keeps your business viable. Tips on accounting and time management will make sure you have the foundation to support your “burning” ambition.

Source posts:

Finance Fridays: Getting Started—Allocating Equity and Financer’s Investment, July 29, 2011

Setting Up Your Accounting System, August 12, 2011
 
Managing Priorities, February 9, 2011
 
Chapter 10: “Burning Examples”

Meet some other entrepreneurs who are burning, lighting the way for us all!

Source posts:

Posts on Rally, Oblong and other success stories among companies that have received investment/counsel from Brad.

Conclusion













-----------------------------
About The Author

Brad has been an early stage investor and entrepreneur for over 20 years. Prior to co-founding Foundry Group, he co-founded Mobius Venture Capital and, prior to that, founded Intensity Ventures, a company that helped launch and operate software companies. Brad is also a co-founder of TechStars.

Brad currently serves on the board of directors of BigDoor, Cheezburger Networks, Fitbit, Gnip, MakerBot, Oblong, Orbotix, and Standing Cloud for Foundry Group. Previously, Brad served as chief technology officer of AmeriData Technologies. AmeriData acquired Feld Technologies, a firm he founded in 1987 that specialized in custom software applications. Brad had grown Feld Technologies into one of Boston’s leading software consulting firms prior to the acquisition. He also directed the diversification into software consulting at AmeriData, a $1.5 billion publicly-traded company which was acquired by GE Capital in 1995.

In addition to his investing efforts, Brad has been active with several non-profit organizations and currently is chair of the National Center for Women & Information Technology, co-chair of Startup Colorado, and on the board of Startup Weekend. Brad is a nationally recognized speaker on the topics of venture capital investing and entrepreneurship and writes the widely read blogs Feld Thoughts and Ask the VC.

Notable companies that Brad has invested in and/or sat on the boards of include Abuzz (acq. NYT), Anyday.com (acq. PALM), Critical Path (CPTH), Cyanea (acq. IBM), Dante Group (acq. WEBM), DataPower (acq. IBM), FeedBurner (acq. by GOOG), Feld Group (acq. by EDS), Gist (acq. RIM), Harmonix (acq. VIA), NetGenesis (IPO), ServiceMagic (acq. IACI), ServiceMetrics (acq. EXDS), and Zynga (ZNGA).

Brad holds Bachelor of Science and Master of Science degrees in Management Science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Brad is also an avid art collector and long-distance runner. He has completed 21 marathons as part of his mission to run a marathon in each of the 50 states.

<chapter>Introduction</chapter>

<section>Beyond the Blog: Feld Thoughts</section>

“Feld Thoughts” is a great example of truth in advertising. This blog, which has existed since before blogging was cool, collects the thoughts of Brad Feld, investor, entrepreneur, MIT grad, tech lover and marathoner.

Brad’s blog is a backstage pass to the 24/7 rock show that is tech startups. It is a master class in startup investing for givers and takers of funds. It is a rolling critique of tech products vast and simple (with enough edge to make the most scathing restaurant critic in Manhattan blush). And it is the journal of a peripatetic marathoner who still believes he will crack the four-hour mark someday.

From such Feld Thoughts, we have constructed “The Burning Entrepreneur,” the e-book on startups that you would take to a desert island if it had electricity, a decent Internet connection and angel investors. “The Burning Entrepreneur” illuminates the actions and attitudes required to launch, fund and ignite your startup. Brad Feld is on fire. Find out what happens when you stand too close.

<section>Editor’s Note</section>

Facebook. Google. Apple. They are the household names of the 21st century. Each seemed to have come from nowhere to change our lives. They didn’t come from nowhere. These giants and other innovative companies large and small have arisen from a process of entrepreneurship, a unity of leadership, creativity, strategy, investment and hard work.

Brad Feld understands that entrepreneurial process. He lives it and guides others through it with his counsel and financing. As Brad writes, startups in the tech era are the spiritual successors to rock bands during the British Invasion. Back then, everyone wanted to be the next Beatles (or perhaps The Who, as they receive a shout-out on Brad’s blog.)

Today, dreamers still huddle and sweat in garages, following the lead of Jobs, Page and Zuckerberg in place of John, Paul, George and Ringo. Brad is at the center of this evolved vibe, a mashup of the Fab Four’s watchmen Brian Epstein and George Martin. He is manager, banker, producer, orchestrator and motivator. His combination of mentoring, energy and relevance drew me to his blog.

In deriving The Burning Entrepreneur from Brad’s blog writings, I sought his core philosophy for shaping leaders who in turn shape startups. He focuses on people, those who create companies and those who find value in the companies. The book includes information about financing, administrative procedures and product development. But mainly, it contains flesh and blood. And fire.

I hope readers will enjoy and absorb Brad Feld’s wisdom and passion. He’s the guru-in-the-wings who hasn’t forgotten how to rush the apron and shred a solo. He wants to get you out of the garage and make you a star. He wants you to burn!

Jason Karpf
Editor


<chapter>Chapter 1: Be On Fire</chapter>

<section>Advice from FAKEGRIMLOCK</section>

While pondering how Yoda would deal with Optimus Prime, I got a tweet from FAKEGRIMLOCK asking if I wanted a contribution from him. Without hesitation I said yes. Following in all its awesomeness (with illustrations), is another missive from my favorite Dinobot. In fact, I liked it so much that it is the inspiration for this book, The Burning Entrepreneur.

BE ON FIRE
WORLD FULL OF IDEA. ALL NEED IS BRAIN. MOST HUMANS HAVE BRAIN.
IDEA BY SELF IS COLD. JUST SIT THERE. DO NOTHING.
IF WANT DO SOMETHING, NEED FIRE.
NEED BE ON FIRE.

WHY BURNING MATTER
MAKE STARTUP HARD. IT HARD BECAUSE YOU WRONG. YOU FAIL.
FAIL COLD? GO HOME. QUIT.
YOU NOT QUIT. YOU BURN. FAIL IS FUEL. MORE FAIL, MORE BURN. BURN FAIL UNTIL ONLY WIN LEFT.
THAT WHY BURNING MATTER. NOTHING STOP PERSON ON FIRE. NOT SLEEP. NOT SICK. NOT BROKE. NOT BULLET. NOT END OF EARTH.
NOTHING.

FIRE MAKE SMOKE
ANGER IS SMOKE. FIRE DESTROY. DESTROY MAKE NEW THINGS GROW. COLD PEOPLE HATE FIRE. NO ONE WANT TO BE FERTILIZER. FIRE NOT CARE.
LOYALTY IS SMOKE. PEOPLE FOLLOW FIRE, GET HOT. NOTHING STOP PERSON ON FIRE. PERSON ON FIRE WRAPPED IN HOT CROWD? THAT FIRE CHANGE WORLD.
WIN IS SMOKE. PERSON ON FIRE NOT CARE ABOUT WIN. NOT CARE ABOUT MONEY, FAME. WIN HAPPEN WHEN BUSY DO THINGS THAT MATTER. THINGS ON FIRE.
WHERE IS FIRE? LOOK FOR ANGER. MIDDLE OF ANGER IS CHANGE. MIDDLE OF CHANGE IS HOT CROWD. MIDDLE OF HOT CROWD IS WIN. MIDDLE OF WIN IS FIRE.

HOW MAKE FIRE?
WORLD IS BROKEN. FIX IT.
RIGHT IDEA HARD. RIGHT IDEA HURT. RIGHT IDEA IS HOLE IN WORLD.
RIGHT IDEA MAKE BURN INSIDE TO FIX. CAN TAKE DAY OFF FROM IDEA? IT WRONG ONE.
FIND IDEA THAT BURN, GRAB WITH BOTH HANDS, NEVER LET GO.
THAT HOW MAKE FIRE.




YOU MUST BURN
EVERYONE THINK WAY TO STARTUP IS TALENT + IDEA + MONEY.
EVERYONE WRONG.
STARTUP NOT ABOUT MAKE THING, SELL THING. STARTUP ABOUT CHANGE WORLD.
WORLD IS COLD. YOU MUST LIGHT WORLD ON FIRE.
YOUR FIRE.
YOU. MUST. BURN.



In order to stay on the #NOEATFRIDAY list, I promised FAKEGRIMLOCK that this would be licensed under Creative Commons. Anyone can do anything they want with this, including FAKEGRIMLOCK (as long as no infinite loops are created.)

<section>Be On The Edge</section>

If setting you on fire isn’t enough, let’s push you off a cliff. Sound too dangerous? This sensible advice comes from my Dad, Stanley Feld.

When I was a teenager, Dad told me: “If you aren’t standing on the edge you are taking up too much space.”

My dad pushed me, firmly but gently. As a kid I did very well in school, loved to read, and played sports (tennis and then running). When I was 13, I bought my first computer (an Apple II) with my Bar Mitzvah money (and a little help from my Dad). I was a typical nerdy, inquisitive teenager – I hung out with “the honors gang” but also liked plenty of time alone to read and explore new things. I sucked at anything mechanical so almost everything I explored was “in my mind.”

Before I could drive (so I must have been 15) my dad introduced me to a patient of his named Gene Scott. Gene had been a technology executive in the 1960′s and 1970′s and, when I met him, was running a technology startup with his son Brian called Scott Instruments. Gene and Brian had created one of the first consumer voice recognition systems – it was called the Scott Instruments VET-2 (for “voice entry terminal” – I think the 2 was because it worked on an Apple II.) Gene was my second mentor (my Dad was my first) and he introduced me to the wonders of technology entrepreneurship.

One day when driving home with my Dad from lunch in Denton, Texas with Gene, I was overflowing with ideas. Gene had given me a VET-2 and I was bringing it home to plug into my Apple II and create all kinds of stuff with it. I’m sure medical dictation was one of them because my Dad was always using his business – that of running a thriving endocrinology practice – to give me business and software problems to work on.

“If you aren’t standing on the edge you are taking up too much space.” Thirty years later that line continues to be a defining characteristic for how I live my life. I’m constantly pushing, looking for the edge of whatever I do.

<section>Be Silent, Be Deadly</section>

So we’ve set you on fire and told you to toe the nearest precipice. Before you think that being a burning entrepreneur only means taking punishment, let’s talk about putting the hurt on others (in a positive business sense). 

When thinking about the characteristics of some of my favorite companies, a phrase popped into my head about what ties all of these companies together – they are the silent killers.

When I look at the Foundry Group portfolio, we’ve got a bunch of silent killers in it. They don’t spend a lot of time trying to get written up in TechCrunch. They often aren’t based in the Bay Area. Their CEO’s don’t run around bloviating about what they are going to do some day. They just do it. And suddenly they are $10 million, or $20 million, or even $50 million revenue companies. Before anyone has really noticed. Without any real competition. They are the unambiguous and dominant market leader.

Sure, their customers and partners know who they are. Other entrepreneurs, especially ones who work with them in some way know who they are. Smart technical folks know who they are. And the geographic community that they are in know who they are since they are often the leaders of their startup communities. 

But they sneak up on you. They don’t waste their time hyping themselves. They don’t run around trying to get VCs interested in what they are doing. Rather, they just do. Their twitter streams are filled with substantive stuff. Their blogs are about their product and how it is used. Their people are everywhere they need to be, and spend almost no time being places they don’t need to be.

These are the silent killers. And I love them.

Start Up Your Attitude

When launching or growing a start-up, the first thing to start up is your attitude. You must be on fire, on the edge and on the attack silently. With this personality mashup, you’ll be a burning entrepreneur.

<chapter>Chapter 2: Be In Love With Your Business</chapter>

<section>An Entrepreneurial Love Story</section>

Creating the burning entrepreneur attitude asks a lot of you. And it can’t happen in a vacuum (remember high school science class: fire needs oxygen). Your relationship with your business will drive your transformation into a burning entrepreneur. And that relationship needs to be heavy, as in the L-word.

My wife Amy and I spent a week in Tuscany with some friends, including Howard Lindzon. Howard is the CEO of StockTwits, a company we’ve been an investor in for a few years. If you know Howard, you know he’s an always on, mostly hilarious, sometimes crazy (like a fox), super-high-energy-except-when-on-Ambien guy. After four days of Tuscany, Howard was completely chilled out and more relaxed than I’ve ever seen him.

But don’t let this totally chilled out Howard fool you. He was on his computer a lot. Whenever I looked over at him, he was on the StockTwits website communicating with the stock community he’s helped create and loves. As the market was gyrating around he tweeted up a storm, put up a bunch of content on StockTwits, did some trades in his hedge fund, and wrote a few insightful (and funny) blog posts about the market including his discovery that the Tuscany VIX is always less than 10.

Howard loves StockTwits. He loves his business. He loves stocks. He loves the community of people that care about stocks. And he’s creating a company – a really interesting and important one – around his passion. It’s wonderful, infectious, fascinating, exciting, and awesome.

Entrepreneurs must be completely obsessed. They must be thinking – every single waking moment – about how they are going to change the way the world interacts with the vertical market they are attacking.

Howard defines this type of entrepreneur. It was incredibly inspiring to be around. We had a blast doing non-StockTwits/non-stock stuff, but when he was working he knew exactly what he was going to work on.

We have chosen to invest with several other entrepreneurs who have similar characteristics. 
When an entrepreneur is trying to decide between a couple of different ideas, I often ask the question “which one are you in love with?” If there’s a quick response, then the answer is easy. If the answer is none of them, that’s the answer to which one he should pursue. Howard reminded me of this.

<section>Intrinsic Motivation</section>

A business that teaches you is a business with motivation built into it; in short, it’s a business you can love. At a talk I gave to a room full of first year graduate business school students, I was asked “what motivates me.” Before I answered, I felt compelled to explain what intrinsic motivation is and used the following example to describe it.

“Tonight, I’ll spend about 90 minutes talking to y’all.  I’m doing it because I enjoy it and I learn from it.  While I hope it is useful to you, that’s not the reason I’m doing it.  While I hope you have fun, learn something, and enjoy our time together, I won’t feel better or worse if you do.  In fact, since my goal is to learn from everything I do, I’d much rather you give me feedback about things you think could have improved our 90 minutes together.”

I then went on to explain that I’m motivated by learning. I’ve decided to spend my entire professional life learning about entrepreneurship and have decided that my laboratory is “creating and helping build software and Internet companies.”

Over time, I’ve expanded the range of things that contribute to my learning.  During the past four years I’ve spent a lot of time with first time entrepreneurs through the creation and development of TechStars program.  As part of that, I decided to try to codify some of what I’d learned.  That led to me writing Do More Faster with David Cohen, which led to learning about creating, publishing, and promoting a book.

In each of these cases, I’m intrinsically motivated. I hope that TechStars is a success. I hope that every company that goes through TechStars benefits from it. I hope that the book that David and I have written is well received. I hope that people learn from it. But none of these are why I spent enormous amounts of time and energy on each activity.

I was in a conversation with someone who was clearly extrinsically motivated. He approached me as though I was extrinsically motivated. He kept thanking me for what I was doing for him and then asking me what he could do for me. I finally stopped him and explained the difference between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. I told him that I had no expectation that he’d do anything for me – that I was spending time with him because I hoped to learn something from every interaction I had.

While I’ve presented this as an absolute (e.g. you are either intrinsically or extrinsically motivated), I know that it’s a spectrum for almost everyone (including me). But I think it’s important, and very useful, to understand which end of the spectrum someone is on. Don’t assume everyone is like you!

<chapter>Chapter 3: Don’t Be in the 99%</chapter>

<section>The Dynamics of a 99% Committer</section>

You can’t be a burning entrepreneur unless you’re “all in” with your decisions and commitment. Forget about the way you hedged your bets when you worked for someone else. You must eliminate the hesitation (even if it’s a 1% hesitation) bred in the corporate world. Being 99% certain is not good enough. A burning entrepreneur can hold nothing back!

I heard a great phrase: “he’s a 99% committer.” It was in the context of trying to get something to closure where I felt like someone had committed but it was ambiguous. The person ultimately committed and all was good, but there was some question about outcome for a few days. To be clear, I separate this from a process issue – where the person is on board personally but going through an internal process with a partnership, an investment committee, or a decision making group. Rather, I’m focusing on the person who is able to make a unilateral decision, gets 99% of the way there, and then leaves it a little open.

Now, I’m not criticizing the 99% committer – it’s a very effective style for some people as it generates a lot of control and option value in situations. Specifically, from a control perspective, by not fully committing the 99% committer gets to keep playing out things on the edges, poking, prodding, and getting more information. As long as the other party doesn’t disengage, this is effective, although it definitely runs the risk of creating real fatigue on both parties.

Furthermore, there is a lot of option value associated with being a 99% committer. You are almost there, but you stall, so the other party feels compelled to give you more information and hold the door open as long as they can.

But this isn’t me. And when I reflect on the few cases where I’ve played the role of a 99% committer, I’m not unhappy with the outcome, but I’m annoyed with my own behavior. By not being a 99% committer, I’m always able to make a decision, deal with the consequences (good or bad), and move on. As a result, the velocity of what I get done is extremely high and I have very little emotional decision backlog stored up.

It’s a great phrase. I expect I’ll use it plenty in the future.

<section>Tenacious and Oblivious</section>

I’ve often said that two emotions that are irrelevant for an entrepreneur are fear and anxiety. My favorite quote from Dune is “Fear is the mind killer” and many people get confused and don’t understand the difference between panic and urgency (where panic is just a more extreme version of anxiety.)

During a particularly informative evening and a day in Colorado Springs, I participated in a number of entrepreneur-related events, but my favorite was a talk that I gave to a freshman class at University of Colorado at Colorado Springs with John Street, a long time friend and one of the first entrepreneurs I met when I moved to Boulder.

The class that we spoke to was a freshman seminar about “Being Your Own Boss”. John and I quickly told our stories and then spent the majority of the time answering questions. One of them was something like: “What characteristics have made you successful?”

John went first and stated the two most important things about him were that he is “tenacious” and “oblivious”. Having known John for many years, tenacity defines him. He simply does not give up. While he can appear stubborn, he’s a learning machine, open to any feedback, constantly asking questions – especially when faced with challenges, and searching for better approaches on his quest to solving any problem he encounters. I view this as a perfect example of a tenacious entrepreneur.

I was puzzled by oblivious until John explained it. He said that he’s oblivious to why something can’t be done, or why something is difficult, or why someone doesn’t want something to happen. That made perfect sense to me and is a characteristic of many of the great entrepreneurs I’ve worked with over the years.

So, when you’re tenacious and oblivious, you’ll make the giant jump from 99% commitment to 100%. Notice I didn’t use the cliche of “110%.” It’s hard enough to give your all, and it’s good enough to make you a burning entrepreneur.

<chapter>Chapter 4: Ignorance is Success</chapter>

<section>Ignore the Word “Bubble”</section>

Conventional wisdom is for cube dwellers and butt kissers, not for burning entrepreneurs. Such “wisdom” frequently comes from reading Wall Street tea leaves and hanging on every word of self-appointed pundits. Ignorance is success when you ignore the data dumps, the talking heads and the naysayers. Clear the air so your fire can burn!


“Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn, and caldron bubble.” – Macbeth

Every time I hear the word “bubble” I think of that quote from Macbeth. I also think of Tulip Mania and the South Sea Company which purportedly was the source of the concept of an economic bubble. And then I remember Charles Mackay’s classic book Extraordinary Popular Delusions & the Madness of Crowds.

When I returned a week off the grid I encountered the word “bubble” over and over again when referring to the tech industry. A variety of people were using it to describe the current situation. This had been going on for at least a quarter or two, but the velocity of it seemed to have picked up with a wave of high-priced VC investments along with large financing endeavors for nascent companies.

While plenty of tech bloggers were tossing around the word “bubble”, I also noticed it among the mainstream media. But more interestingly I saw it in my Twitter feed from some entrepreneurs and VCs who I respect a lot.

In the tech industry, the great Internet bubble inflated between 1999 and 2000 and deflated (or popped) in 2001. I remember it well as 2001 was easily the most challenging year of my business life. I made a lot of mistakes in 1999 and 2000 that I’ve hopefully learned from (I believe I have) and took on a lot of challenging things between 2001 and 2005 which laid the groundwork for the business context that I find myself in today. So, in hindsight, the great Internet bubble of 2001 was very powerful and useful to me, even though it was very painful.

I refuse to make predictions as the only thing I know with certainty is that some day I will be dead. I view predictions as irrelevant in the context of what I am working on and trying to accomplish. Sure, I pay attention to what is going on around me, have hypotheses about what’s going to happen, and adjust my behavior accordingly. But I think making predictions with certainty, such as “we are in a bubble” are useless, especially in the absence of recommendations about what to do to either defend against or take advantage of the situation.

In 2008, everyone in business and politics was consumed with the “global economic crisis”. However, entrepreneurs just put their heads down and continued to accelerate the current web revolution which started around 2004 with “Web 2.0” being articulated by Tim O’Reilly. There is once again enormous focus on entrepreneurship as the salvation for many things, with the naysayers starting to say “but it’s a bubble” or some variant.

If you recognize that we are in a strong, positive, upward segment of the current “tech company creation cycle,” that’s more than enough. You should accept that we’ll be back in a downward part of the cycle at some point, but that we don’t know if it’ll be in a week, month, year, or decade.

If you are an entrepreneur, you can build a significant, powerful, sustainable business taking advantage of market expansion during the up cycle and consolidating your position during the down cycle. Don’t get distracted by speculating about “bubbles” other than the ones in your bathtub. Instead, spend your energy creating amazing products, thrilling your customers, building an awesome organization, and living your life. Always remember that one day you too will be dead.

<section>Ignore the Dow</section>

Tom Evslin had a post titled Don’t Watch The Dow! that caused me to say “right on.” In 1999, 2000, and 2001 I had a my Yahoo page up with a bunch of stocks, including a number of companies I was an investor in, as my home page. I’d hit refresh 5,321 times a day, generating plenty of CPM-based revenue for Yahoo.

When the market went down, I felt sad. When it went up I got the emotional equivalent of a sugar high. When it went back down again, I was bummed. Up – smile. Down – depressed. Up – happy. Down – cranky. And this was all before lunchtime. Maybe it was too much coffee or not enough sleep, but it got even worse when the market shifted from 1/8s to 0.01s.

As an entrepreneur, this was all noise. As a long term VC investor, it was also all noise. Sure, the broad cycles had impact, although lots of people disagree on what they actually mean (e.g. do VCs actually benefit long term from down cycles? Are the best companies started in recessions when everything is cheaper and more available?).

Over time, I’ve learned that none of the short-term moves in the stock market matter at all in my life. It’s occasionally entertaining to turn on CNBC and see my friend Paul Kedrosky in the octobox telling all the other people that they don’t actually understand macro-economics, but it’s no different than watching McEnroe when he’s announcing a Nadal – Federer match. It’s just sport.

Now, get back to work on something you can have an impact on!

<section>Ignore the Naysayers</section>

I read Jonathan Livingston Seagull for the first time in 1975 when I was about 10 years old. I’ve read it several times over the last 35 years, but probably hadn’t read it in over a decade. My first business partner, Dave Jilk (now the Standing Cloud founder / CEO), gave it to me as a birthday gift.

I read it again and it was as powerful, inspiring, and enlightening as I remembered it. I’m often asked what books I’d recommend to an entrepreneur (especially an aspiring entrepreneur). There are two: Jonathan Livingston Seagull and Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance.

Whenever we are in the upswing of an entrepreneurial cycle, like we are right now, I start seeing all kinds of weird stuff appear. Random people, who get notoriety for themselves, blow up. The media is aggressively negative presumably in the quest for getting readership. Entitlement behavior runs rampant. The quick buck artists appear. Money becomes a central topic of many conversations. Established companies and government suddenly wake up to the power of innovation and try to co-opt the energy. The word bubble becomes so popular that a bubble builds around using the word bubble.

The great entrepreneurs just keep building their companies. They focus relentlessly on their products, their customers, and their people. They create things that delight, take chances, make mistakes, and iterate as they, and their organizations, get better. They just keep at it and the very best ones shut out and ignore all the noise. And they learn, and learn, and learn.

Just like Jonathan Livingston Seagull. Young Jonathan realizes he is different and then outcast, but he discovers himself. He then discovers others like him, including his great mentors. He learns, experiments, tries new things, makes mistakes, and learns. And then he becomes the mentor and teaches other young seagulls to discover themselves. Throughout, he does what he loves the most – he flies, and practices, and learns.

If you are an entrepreneur, take one-hour out of your day this week and read Jonathan Livingston Seagull. And then spend another hour, alone, thinking about it. I assure you that it’ll be worth the time.

<section>And One More Thing to Ignore</section>

As much of a New Year’s ritual as belting out “Auld Lang Syne,” every magazine, newspaper, and most of the online publications known to man put together their “year in review” and their “new year prediction” editions. What a fucking waste of human energy.

This has been one of my pet peeves for 20+ years. For a while I managed to ignore them completely. At some point I started getting asked for my predictions and succumbed to my ego for a few years and participated in the prediction folly. At some point I realized that there was zero correlation between my predictions and reality and that by participating, I was merely helping perpetuate this silliness.

The energy that goes into the “year in review” and “prediction” stuff seems to be significantly greater in “extreme” (both good and bad) times. The prognostications become stronger and bolder. The analysis by hindsight intensifies. It doesn’t benefit anybody.

Find a Dharma that fits your Karma (more on that when I review Strategic Intuition: The Creative Spark in Human Achievement (Columbia Business School) by Bill Duggan. You get a finite number of years on this planet – make the most of all of them, no matter what is going on around you.

<chapter>Chapter 5: Meet the New Boss, NOT the Same as the Old Boss</chapter>

<section>Be the CEO of Your Job</section>

It’s your startup. You’re the person in charge. Congratulations... now don’t blow it! Do NOT morph into every manager and executive you’ve ever hated. Do NOT become the type of “leader” who gets ahead in the traditional corporate world by enshrining mediocrity and exterminating talent. A burning entrepreneur must be a new type of CEO and demand similar innovation from the core team. (BTW, org charts make great kindling for your flame!)

The Who gave us one of the saddest and truest lyrics in rock history: “Meet the new boss. Same as the old boss.” However, the burning entrepreneur “Won’t Get Fooled Again!”

Having a CEO’s command begins even before you become one, becoming a category of behavior throughout your career. Mark Pincus, the CEO of Zynga, riffed on the phrase “be the CEO of your job” in a board meeting a year or so ago. It stuck with me and I’ve thought about it many times since.

The NY Times did a great “Corner Office” interview with Mark titled Are You a C.E.O. of Something? Among other things it explored the idea of being the CEO of your job.  Fred Wilson – also an investor in Zynga – wrote a post on Sunday titled Empowering Your Team which talks about one aspect of this.  But Fred left out a great example from one of Mark’s earlier companies (Support.com) which really nails this concept.

“We had this really motivated, smart receptionist. She was young. We kept outgrowing our phone systems, and she kept coming back and saying, “Mark, we’ve got to buy a whole new phone system.” And I said: “I don’t want to hear about it. Just buy it. Go figure it out.” She spent a week or two meeting every vendor and figuring it out. She was so motivated by that. I think that was a big lesson for me because what I realized was that if you give people really big jobs to the point that they’re scared, they have way more fun and they improve their game much faster. She ended up running our whole office.”

Instead of spending a lot of his time solving the problem, or setting up a committee to spend a month figuring out the phone system, or asking someone more senior to the receptionist to figure it out, he gave her the responsibility of solving the entire problem.  He anointed her “CEO of her job” – as the receptionist, she was the one who felt the most pain from the inadequate phone system and was probably in the best position to figure out a solution.

I work with CEOs every day. So I’m naturally wired to encourage them to be CEO of their own job. While this is pretty meta, it’s an important starting point as I already think this way all the time.  I’m certainly not perfect and have moments where I just jump in and try to solve a specific problem, but most of the time I let the CEOs be CEO. However, when I contemplate this, I realize I haven’t done a good job of encouraging the CEOs to make everyone in their organization CEO of the job. Some CEOs do this naturally and – not surprisingly – these are generally the highest achieving companies. 

If you are the CEO of an entrepreneurial organization, do you encourage everyone in the company to be CEO of their job? Is this culturally (and functionally) acceptable? Do they get rewarded for taking risks and succeeding (or failing) like you do? If not, would they be more effective if they did?

If you applied the lens of “be the CEO of your job” to your job, would you behave any differently?

<section>The Power of a CEO 360 Review</section>

Here’s another way to not be the “old boss”: Get your ass out of the room! I sat through an annual CEO 360 review at a company that has been very serious about executive development since inception. It reminded me how powerful this is when it’s done correctly.

In this particular case, the entire board and management team had an hour-long facilitated discussion without the CEO in the room. The facilitator is not an employee of the company but has worked with the entire management team on executive development as they’ve grown over the past 5+ years.

This company is doing extremely well and the CEO is excellent.  However, the fact that he’s comfortable enough with himself (and his team) to step out of the room and allow us (board and management) to have a candid, direct, confidential discussion is an important message to everyone.

Most interestingly to me was the value of the conversation. Even though this group has worked together for a long time, the company continues to evolve and the CEO knows he has opportunities to continue to grow.  By having this type of a candid conversation across the team and the board, it creates real clarity around where the personal growth opportunities for the CEO are.

A minority of the companies I’m on the board of do this but this particular CEO 360 Review motivated me to rethink that and encourage it in more cases. Do you have the guts, honesty and commitment to excellence to embrace this process? If you want to be a burning entrepreneur, you’d better!
<section>The VP of People</section>

A decade ago I didn’t pay much attention to the VP of HR position. Today, I view it as a key role if you are growing headcount at least 50% year over year and have more than 20 people in the company. And, title inflation not withstanding (see following), I prefer to call it “VP of People” since we are people after all, not “human resources” or “HRs”.

Over the past five years, I’ve had the privilege to work with a handful of amazing VPs of People. And, as several of our portfolio companies continue their incredible growth rates, I’ve been involved in recruiting a few new ones to these companies. I have three basic principles for each of them.

1. The VP of People must be part of the executive team and report to the CEO. Many companies that I’ve been involved in have viewed the VP of HR as “key recruiter and HR administrator.” This is not very useful and – in a startup that is growing quickly – dramatically under positions the VP of People as you’ll see in my next principle. If the CEO isn’t willing to have the VP of People on his executive team, I think it’s worth asking the question “why not – aren’t people the most important resource you are adding to your company?”

2. The VP of People is the go to person on the executive team for other executive team members. Every CEO I’ve ever worked with either pays too little attention or too much attention to the dynamics of the people on the executive team. This isn’t just the CEO to VP interactions – it’s the VP to VP interaction dynamics. 

When VP issues blow up, CEOs often lose huge chunks of time to trying to figure out how to manage through or mitigate the issues. It’s the VP of People’s job to A) Help everyone work through the issues, and B) Summarize what’s going on to the CEO. There will be cases where the CEO needs to get involved, but by having another executive in the mix, it focuses energy on solving the problems, rather than stacking up, or avoiding, issues.

3. The VP of People is responsible for helping everyone on the executive team, including the CEO, level up. Since I believe that life is one big videogame, leveling up in your job should be the goal of everyone, especially executives in a company. This used to be called “professional development” but, like “HR,” I think it misses the broader point as I’m not just talking about professional development, but emotional, intellectual, and personal development.  There is no possible way a CEO can focus on this effectively across his team. The VP of People can do this assuming he is on the executive team and is a peer with the other executives.

If you are a CEO of a fast growing company with more than 20 people, do you have a VP of People?

<section>Beware Title Inflation</section>

Even though I believe in creative, authentic titles like “VP of People,” I hate title inflation. Suddenly, it’s everywhere. I’ve seen more business cards or email sigs lately with adjectives like “executive” or “senior” or “senior executive” or “special” or “chief” in front of more traditional titles (e.g. “vice president”). The “chief” one is especially bizarre since it’s not always obvious whether the CSO is a “Chief Sales Officer” or a “Chief Security Officer” which in and of itself is a problem. Forbes ran a funny/sad piece on some of the more ridiculous new “chiefs” in Corporate America.

When I think about roles, regardless of where the person sits in the organization, I like to think of them as “head of something.” That lets me focus on the “something” that the person is responsible for. This scales up and down the organization since the receptionist in a company is the “head of meeting people when they walk in the door and making sure the are comfortable and find their way to the meeting they are there for.” More importantly, it forces senior execs, such as a COO, CSO, CPO, CRO, CIO, CTO, CDO, CAO, or CFO to define clearly what they are the “head” of.

As I mentioned earlier, I heard the phrase “be the CEO of your job” from Mark Pincus and have used it many times over the years. Whenever I’m talking to someone about their role in a company, I’m always trying to figure out what they are going to be the CEO (or head) of. When I have the inevitable board member / executive discussion about roles and responsibilities when there are issues, I always carry this metaphor around in my head (e.g. are you, the executive, being an effective CEO of your job?). And, when I meet someone new and I see that their title is “Senior Technology Strategist – Digital Products Division”, I try to figure out what they are “the head of”, even if it is one specific thing.

If you are CEO of a company, try the following exercise. Take everyone that directly reports to you and change their title to “head of X.” Scribble this on a white board and see if you have all the X’s you need for your whole company covered. Is there overlap that is unnecessary or are there big holes. And are the right people the right heads of things?

Then, have each of your direct reports do this for their direct reports. Rather than worry about titles, put “head of X” for each person. Keep doing this down the hierarchy. Do you have what you need covered? Is there duplication and overlap? Are the right people heads of the right things?

While it may not be possible to kill title inflation for a variety of reasons, both internal to a company (mostly ego and culture driven) or external to a company (mostly ego and power driven), if you are a CEO, don’t let it confuse you when you think about who is doing what in your company.

<chapter>Chapter 6: It’s the Product, Stupid!</chapter>

<section>Obsession with the Product</section>

The title of this e-book may be The Burning Entrepreneur, but it’s really not about you. It’s about the product – the insanely great offering that brings you dollars and evangelists. Make sure that product is designed, priced and presented to delight your customers.

I love to invest in companies where I can be actively involved as a user of their products.  One of the benefits of actively blogging over the past two years has been an opportunity to play / work with numerous entrepreneurs in my own “lab” (my blog) to understand how their technologies and products work, how the ecosystem around them evolves, and what seems compelling (vs. just interesting or clever.)

When I think back over the past dozen years that I’ve been doing this, my most successful investments were ones that I personally related to, could use their products, and could really dig into them.  Now – I know I’m not the broad market user, and I never confuse myself with that person (especially with enterprise related products), but I do play one on TV. Plus, it’s a really satisfying approach to this business.

In many of the interviews I do, I get asked the inevitable, “What makes a great entrepreneur?”  When I’m on a VC panel, I’m always amused by the answers from my co-panelists as they are usually the same set of “VC cliches” which makes it even more fun when I blurt out my answer:

“A complete and total obsession with the product.”

The great companies that I’ve been an investor in share a common trait – the founder/CEO is obsessed with the product. Not interested, not aware of, not familiar with, but obsessed.  Every discussion trends back toward the product. All of the conversations about customer are really about how the customer uses the product and the value the product brings the customer. The majority of the early teams are focused entirely on the product, including the non-engineering people.  Product, product, product.

And these CEO’s love to show their product to anyone that will listen. They don’t explain the company to people with Powerpoint slides. They don’t send out long executive summaries with mocked up screen shots. They don’t try to engage you in a phone conversation about the great market they are going after. They start with the product. And stay with the product.

I don’t create products anymore (I invest in companies that create them), but I’m a great alpha tester. I’ve always been good at this for some reason – bugs just find me. While my UX design skills are merely adequate, I’ve got a great feel for how to simplify things and make them cleaner.  Plus I’m happy to just grind and grind and grind on the product, offering both detailed and high level feedback indefinitely. 

How a founder/CEO reacts to this speaks volumes to me. I probably first noticed this when interacting with Dick Costolo at FeedBurner when I first met him. I am FeedBurner publisher #699 and used it for my blog back when it was “pre-Alpha”.  I had an issue – sent support@feedburner.com a note – and instantly got a reply from Dick. I had no idea who Dick was, but he helped me and I quickly realized he was the CEO.

Over the next six months we interacted regularly about the product and when he was ready to start fundraising, I quickly made him an offer and we became the lead investor in the round.  My obsession with the product didn’t stop there (as Eric Lunt and many of the other FeedBurner gang can tell you – I still occasionally email SteveO bugs that I find.)

I can give a bunch of other examples like FeedBurner, but I wrap up by saying that I’m just as obsessed with product as the founders. And, as I realize what results in success in my world, I get even more obsessed. Plus, I really like to play with software.

<section>Start with Customer Experience</section>

I was reminded of the importance of starting with the customer experience while I was watching a brilliant video from WWDC 1997 of Steve Jobs. In the video, Jobs appears to be responding to attack by a troll, but is actually doing something much more interesting. Rather than take the bait and react, he thinks carefully in real time and makes a critical philosophical point about his – and Apple’s – approach to creating new products.

The punch line happens early when he says, “You’ve got to start with the customer experience and work backwards for the technology.” It’s five minutes long and worth watching, if only to see how incredibly durable Jobs’ philosophy has been over the past 15 years.

When I think about the companies we’ve invested in, some of them embody this philosophy deeply in their culture. Oblong, MakerBot, Orbotix, Fitbit, and Cloud Engines immediately come to mind. The entrepreneurs running these companies are completely and totally obsessed with the consumer experience of their products, even though their products embody an incredible amount of technology (in each case, both hardware and software innovations). 

When I think about this abstractly, especially in the context of “software eating the world” or my view that the machines have already taken over and resistance is futile, I completely buy the premise that the consumer experience trumps all technical decisions in any context. Apple has proven this throughout the entire customer experience, including being exposed to the product, buying the product, implementing the product, upgrading the product, and getting help with the product. And I think it’s going to get a lot more important going forward.

<section>The Product Cadence</section>

The product cadence is all about knowing how to pace product releases. A seed deal in Q2, 2011 reminded of the importance of the cadence. I loved the company’s product vision – it was in an area that I’ve been working in for a while across a variety of companies and will take a new approach to a very old and persistent problem.

The entrepreneurs of this company had been living the specific problem for a long time and believed they have a unique and very informed way to solve it. Given that the company had no funding to date, the founders had been scrappy and have cobbled together a really impressive prototype that they’d been using to get early customer feedback. It was an ambitious product vision that required some time to fully roll out.

In lean startup language, they had a minimal viable product. However, they were faced with two choices. The first was to polish and release the current prototype.The second was to use the prototype to continue to explore and understand the specific customer fit while building a production version from scratch that incorporates much of what they learned during the prototype development.

In their case, the customer was a business customer rather than a mass market consumer web product. Consequently, having 100,000 free users was not important in the immediate term – I wanted to see them have 100 paying customers which could translate in several thousand users across all of these customers, as our premise was that organizations would have between 1 and 100 early users of the product.

We spent a lot of time in a key meeting talking about this choice as well as overall product cadence. We left it up to the founders to figure out what they wanted to do and what they wanted the cadence to be, but we encouraged a one year top down view, rather than a quarterly bottoms up view. We encouraged them look at where they want to be in a year (remember – this is a seed deal, so we have plenty of ability and desire to continue to fund as they make progress, with or without new investors) and work backwards to a product cadence that works for them.

I didn’t dictate for them to have a once a week, twice a month, once a month, or once a quarter release cycle. But I was fine with any of them as long as they picked the cadence and stuck with it. Given my deep belief in an agile development approach, I didn’t really care what’s in the actual incremental releases at this point as I fully expected the furthest out they would be able to see was one quarter.

It reminded me of something I often tell TechStars teams – “slow down to speed up.” I see so many startups rushing to just get stuff out, without thinking hard about what that stuff is and why anyone would care. Part of this is lack of understanding of what you are trying to accomplish, but some of this is a lack of product cadence. When you have a clearly defined cadence (e.g., a monthly release) you can focus on “what’s next” while in parallel explore “what’s after next.” But in the absence of a cadence, you are always working on “what’s next” and never looking out any further.

<section>Should You Charge More For The Product?</section>

My partner Seth Levine has an outstanding post about the freemium model.  It’s titled Pricing models, the freemium myth and why you may not be charging enough for your product. It’s worth going and reading right now.

He covers a bunch of stuff, nicely divided into the following topics:
	•	Beware of too many pricing tiers.
	•	Have a clear delineation between product tiers.
	•	How about overlay features that you charge by the drink for?
	•	Be careful what you put a tariff on.
	•	The freemium myth.
	•	Don’t be afraid to charge for your product.
	•	Beware the long “trial period”.

Seth has become “the pricing model guy” at Foundry Group – we’ve been dragging him into every pricing conversation whenever they come up.

I have one counterintuitive thing to add – it’s often easier to raise prices early on than lower them.  While many pricing curves assume a decay curve toward lower prices over time, early in the life of your business you should consider gradually raising prices until you hit a natural price ceiling. 

Grandfather your early customers into the old pricing for a period of time (three months to a year) – they’ll feel like they’ve gotten a great deal for being an early adopter. Don’t forget to thank your early customers for their support.

Interestingly, this is the opposite of some very popular (and successful) pricing strategies, such as Apple’s for the iPod and the iPhone. High early prices for premium demand followed by steady price reductions over time as new products are introduced. If you are an established premium provider of a high demand product, especially for a physical good (e.g. a phone) vs. a digital good (e.g. software), this approach makes sense, both from a manufacturing supply perspective as well as a volume manufacturing perspective. But, if you are a digital good, you have a lot more variable manufacturing capacity (as long as you know how to quickly scale) and more margin to play with (ahem – usually 99.9%). 

Seth makes an important balancing point that you shouldn’t start out with too low a price point.  This is especially true if you aren’t willing to raise prices to their natural ceiling over time. But, if you have no idea where to start, and have the courage to increase price quickly as you find early demand, consider a relatively low price point “guess” and then move it up until you find a ceiling.

<chapter>Chapter 7: I Don’t Hate Marketing; Neither Should You</chapter>

<section>Why a New Startup Shouldn’t Have a Marketing Budget</section>

Buzz, coolness factor, community -- these things don’t happen by accident. Marketing is not just reserved for the corporate world (actually... the crappy, traditional variety is). Startups need marketing, the type that’s authentic, the type that burns.

As my partners at Foundry Group know, every time I hear the word “marketing” I throw up a little in my mouth. I hate traditional marketing and have always resisted it early in the life of a new company.

Fred Wilson has a phenomenal blog post titled Marketing. Among other things he demonstrates his mastery of marketing by sending me an email this morning pointing me to the post and saying that he’s channeling me knowing that it’ll likely inspire me to blog something about it and link to his post, increasing the chance that he’ll be the first Google result for the search “Marketing” (he’s already #6 for marketing VC). 

When I think of all of the companies in our portfolio that are growing like crazy, they all spend money on marketing. However, it’s driven by an obsessive focus on the customer and the product, rather than a “marketing budget” or “marketing initiative.” And phrases like “social media marketing” and “marketing spend” rarely surface in discussions, and when they do I vomit a little in my mouth.

Of course marketing is a key part of the success of these companies. However, it’s wired into the DNA of the business, not an extra thing that is attached on, like it used to be in the 1980s and 1990s as “marketing”, “PR”, “marcomm”, etc. were a key part of every startup plan.

<section>I Don’t Hate Marketing</section>

OK, you heard the “throw up in my mouth” line about marketing. I’ve been joking about this long enough that it’s become conventional wisdom that I hate marketing. Yet, if you look at many of our successful investments, they are extraordinarily good at marketing and some people suggest we (Foundry Group, me) are also good at marketing. And remember, I said that I hate traditional marketing.

Chris Moody - a long time friend and COO of Gnip – sent me an extremely thoughtful email titled “Food For Thought.” I read it, thought it was 100% correct, and asked if I could republish it verbatim both as (a) an explanation of how I actually should / do think about marketing and (b) an example of how I learn through direct feedback.

Chris Moody:

At this point I’ve probably heard/read most of your basic philosophical points on the various aspects of building a successful business. I agree with most of them of course. However, there is one area where I’ve consistently felt that you have under represented your true feelings and it feels like your general input on the topic has been mostly nonconstructive. I’d like to try to help change that for the good of the broader entrepreneur community (and to make you look even smarter).

The topic is marketing. I have no doubt missed some brilliant thoughts you’ve offered to the community and I’m sure you’ve provided countless pieces of good advice to individual entrepreneurs in one-on-one situations. But, the sound bite version I’ve heard from you on a few occasions goes something like this “I hate traditional marketing. Focus on building a great product or all the marketing in the world won’t matter.” When I think about the first time entrepreneur, this response feels particularly unhelpful. And, the second part of the quote could be applied to almost all aspects of a startup business including sales, finance, etc. If you don’t have a great product, none of the other shit matters.

And yet, when I see how Foundry Group approaches marketing and when I look across your portfolio companies, I see a very common thread around how you guys approach marketing. I would characterize the theme as “marketing through thought leadership.” In more basic terms it is expressing marketing ideas via “this is why we are doing what we are doing and why it is important” instead of “hey, look at me.” Have a new product feature? Sure blog about the feature, but spend way more time on why the feature is important to your overall purpose and beliefs.

To illustrate the point, I’ve recently talked to/interviewed a few current/former people from Rally and ReturnPath. When I ask them “what is the most significant thing you did from a marketing perspective to accelerate the business” the answer across the board has been “we focused on being a thought leader in our space.” As you well know that is the same approach we are taking at Gnip and I see it in many of your other portfolio companies too. Not sure it is always a conscience effort by the companies, but it seems to be pretty consistent across the portfolio.

When I think about FG itself I see tons of “marketing activity” but most of it could also be just be labeled: thought leadership. You sponsor conferences around topics that you care about. Your blog post are rich with “here’s why we did it and why it matters” instead of “here’s what we did.” In fact, your whole theme-based approach is really about thought leadership focused in a few areas.

Foundry Group clearly believes that startups have the power to change the world. You guys spend countless time and effort expressing your opinions on this topic. You write books to support your beliefs. If you only talked about what you do with your startups “we invested in x, we sold y”, the conversation would be short and have a limited audience. Instead, you talk about what you believe and why startups matter. As a result, you have built a real following around people that care about the topic.

If I were going to create the Brad Feld sound bite for Marketing it would go something like this “Don’t do marketing. Focus on becoming a thought leader in your space. Talk everyday with your customers, perspective customers, partners, and the world about why you do what you do and why you think it is important. The reality is you can only talk about what you do one or two times before people think ‘got it’ and stop listening. But, if you talk about what you believe and point to countless examples that exemplify your beliefs, you can build real engagement with people who care/believe the same things.”

<section>Early Stage Marketing and Sales – The “Why” Vs. The “What”</section>

I was at a Rally Software board meeting where we spent a chunk of time finalizing and approving the 2005 operating plan. A big part of the discussion – not surprisingly – was on the sales ramp and the corresponding expense base (and timing of opex growth throughout the year based on a prediction of sales growth and performance.)

Rally started shipping their product in mid-2004. So, 2005 was their first full year of product ship. They had a nice, active customer base that is growing as expected. The growth curve was ambitious (but achievable). However, their operating expense ramp (pre-board meeting discussion) assumed they would make the sales plan. The guys running Rally are responsible and know how to sandbag a plan, so were confident that they wouldn’t pull the trigger on hiring if they didn’t see the sales ramp happening. The going-in proposal (and plan) that assumed they hit their numbers relied on management backing off hiring if they missed their numbers.

None of the companies I’ve been in involved with to-date have made their operating plan on their first year of product ship. Occasionally they outperform, but they almost always under-perform for some reason. The reasons are often logical and non-fatal, but the dynamic that gets created is one where the business is always “behind plan.” This sucks.

I made the strong point that I actually cared LESS about “making our 2005 revenue plan” then I did about learning why people are interested in what we do, why they turn into real prospects, why they become customers, and why they buy more stuff from us. I knew – with certainty – that the 2005 revenue forecast was wrong – we just didn’t have enough data to have any precision on it. So – I wanted to learn the “why” in 2005 – not that “what.”

We had a sales force to comp, a team to motivate, and a plan to achieve. So – the “what” was important. However, in my experience, the way to calibrate things is to set up the operating plan so you are in a position to increase opex as you are successful versus having to back off spending (or hiring) if you fall short of plan.

I’d rather go to a board meeting mid-year where the management team says “we’ve hit our revenue ramp so far this year so we want to pull some head count adds forward” vs. the meeting that says “we missed our revenue ramp so we’re holding off hiring folks in the plan.” The nuance is subtle but the dynamic is important – as you succeed, you get to apply more resources; if you don’t reach your goal, you haven’t assumed more resources (e.g. we can’t hit the goal because we need the resources.)

It also reinforces the focus on the “why.” If we fall short of plan, we’ll focus on “why”. If we exceed plan, we’ll rejoice, talk about “why”, and add more resources. However, we won’t spend a lot of time agonizing over “what we should do because we missed plan.” Financial planning is imprecise early in a business – a smart executive team understands this and sets the right expectations and parameters around it.

<section>Are Your Customers Your Best Marketing?</section>

On one special day, the recurring theme of the power of word-of-mouth marketing came several times for me. That day started out with an email from Raj Bhargava, the CEO of StillSecure, that pointed to an unsolicited positive review of StillSecure’s StrataGuard product on an end-user’s blog. Later in the morning, I had a meeting with a new consumer product company with a cool invention that was created by a friend / neighbor.They had built 25 prototypes and had 24 of the 25 users of the prototypes rave about the product. At the end of the day I had a meeting with a $400k two-person software company that is trying to figure out how to accelerate their growth.

I had the word-of-mouth theme in my head from the StillSecure product review post. In my first meeting, I listened as the entrepreneurs told me they needed a $2 million financing to do the first production run of the product (1,000 units) done, get a marketing guy hired, do “marketing,” build channel relationships, and see if things worked. If they did, they either needed $0m of additional financing (yeah, right) or $8m of additional financing, depending on how they rolled out the next wave of marketing.

In the second meeting, the founder told me that of all the marketing approaches he tried (trade shows, print ads, cold call of industry lists), the only one that was working effectively was Google AdSense. In this meeting, he suggested that he was going to try a bunch of new (and the same) things. When I probed, I found out that his existing customers are ecstatic with the product, the company has plenty of leads, but he can’t figure out how to motivate the leads to quickly turn into customers.

In both cases, I kept hearing the word “marketing” used generically. I despise the word “marketing” – it’s often the weakest link in a startup company.  “Marketing” is vague and non-specific, often poorly executed and measured, and usually a huge waste of money relative to the output. Oh – and while there are plenty of “tried and true” approaches (that any marketing consultant would be happy to charge you plenty of money to explain to you) – the effective approaches have been evolving a lot lately, especially as user-generated content becomes ubiquitous.

Several years ago, I suggested to my portfolio companies that they fire their VP of Marketing and hire a VP of Demand Generation (it could be the same person if the VP of Marketing was willing to accept a quota and meaningful, measurable variable compensation.) Hopefully, this VP of Demand Generation understands the incredible power of having your customers so happy with your product that they’ll talk about it online. To see an example of this, FeedBurner has been doing a great job of highlighting this with their Publisher Buzz blog where they link to posts from “people who kind of dig FeedBurner.”

I suggested to both companies that I met with that they stop talking about “marketing” and instead focus on getting their existing customers to tell the world about their product through blogs, references, online interviews, and at cocktail parties (these are both products that the target customer will ultimately start talking to a friend about over a drink). 

Try something – for 24 hours, substitute the phrase “lead generation” for “marketing” in every conversation you have and see what happens.

<chapter>Chapter 8: OK, It’s Really the Money, Stupid</chapter>

<section>How to Raise Capital as a First-Time Entrepreneur</section>

Despite everything this book does to get you to work on yourself, your products and most importantly, your customers, I know what’s really on your mind – the capital you need to start and sustain your venture. This following explains the lifeblood dollars and the people behind them. And remember, investors want to see a burning entrepreneur!

Dave Lavinsky, author of the Growthink Blog, conducted a podcast interview of me on how to raise capital as first-time entrepreneur. Find below Dave’s written intro and summary, along with a link to the actual interview.

Dave Lavinsky:

For those of you who are not familiar with Brad, his background includes starting and selling his own software company, investing as an angel in 40 to 50 companies, and founding or co-founding three venture capital firms: Intensity Ventures, Mobius Venture Capital and Foundry Group, where he currently serves as Managing Director.

While there were several invaluable points for entrepreneurs seeking capital in the interview, I found the following to be most interesting:

1. Your VC firm is your partner.

Many first-time entrepreneurs view VCs simply as providers of capital. In actuality, VCs are partners. They exert control over your company. They have experience in product development or scaling companies, or both, and can provide significant value beyond the money they infuse in companies.

Because VCs are partners that exert control, you need to assess them much like you would other partners. Mainly, you need to make sure that there is a really good fit.

2. Angel investors are the friend of the first-time entrepreneur.

First time entrepreneurs should strongly consider angel investments prior to venture capital. Angel investors often have financing experience which can help entrepreneurs navigate the VC waters when they are ready (there are a ton of terms and issues involved with venture capital that most first-time entrepreneurs don't know about).

Angel investors also tend to have relationships with VCs. Also, angels often have the operational experience to help grow the entrepreneur's company. And finally, the angels' funding can help the company grow to a point where it is more suitable for venture capital.

However, when structuring angel deals, it is imperative to keep the pricing/valuation fair and the deal terms as simple as possible. If not, raising subsequent venture capital rounds becomes more challenging.

3. Don't look for investors who are not a good fit

Brad mentioned the 80/20 or even the 99/1 rule. Essentially, entrepreneurs should spend a ton of time on the 1% of investors who are a great fit. And not waste their effort on the other investors.

Two key aspects that Brad mentioned for ensuring a good fit are: 1) geography (many VCs will only invest in certain geographic regions), and 2) sector (Foundry Group simply doesn't invest in Clean Tech; no matter how exciting the company looks). I would also add "stage" to this list as many VCs focus on companies at specific stages (e.g., some only want post-revenue companies, etc.)

---

To find out more, go to Dave’s blog and listen to the podcast.

<section>The Definition of an Angel Investor</section>

Historically, I’ve always said that someone can call themselves an angel investor only if they actually make angel investments!  I’ve been exposed to many “angel investors” who have actually never written a check for an equity investment. These non-angels come in many shapes and sizes and often end up either offering to become “advisers” for equity (or worse – a retainer), “brokers” (where they help you raise money for a percentage raised), or employees (where the end up trying to get a job). Now, there is nothing wrong with this, other than them presenting themselves as “angel investors.” Oh, and some people just like to be in clubs with other people who presumably make investments hang out.

My historical viewpoint was an angel investor is defined as someone who makes at least one equity investment in a seed or early stage company each year of at least $25,000. So, if an angel investor has been investing for four years, they have at least four separate investments of at least $25,000 each for a total of at least $100,000 invested. Basically, if you can’t (or don’t) invest at least $25,000 per year, I don’t think you should call yourself an angel investor.

As we worked through the StartupVisa stuff, we realized this wasn’t a high enough threshold for the type of angel investors we thought should be able to sponsor a Startup visa.  So, we came up with the definition of a “Super Angel.”  A Super Angel is an angel investor who has been investing for at least three years and has made at least two equity investments of at least $50,000 each in each of the three years.  This is a total of at least six equity investments totaling at least $300,000. Most of the people I consider Super Angels are substantially above this threshold.

<section>VC as a Produce Supplier</section>

I was in a meeting with Rich Miner from Google Ventures with some entrepreneurs we are working with on a potential investment. While the team wasn’t a rookie team, they’d never worked with VCs before and they’d been wrestling around the dynamics of how to interact with the two VCs in the room (me and Rich) and the various angels that were part of the seed round we are planning to do.

In the middle of the discussion, Rich used a brilliant metaphor of “VC as produce supplier.” The CEO was talking about how she realized she was the lead chef in the kitchen, but viewed us as some combination between sous chefs, owners, and the diners in the restaurant. This was apparent in the interactions – was she trying to “please us,” listen to us and do what we said, or put us to work? This was made even hard with the handful of angels involved – where did they fit in? And, it was clear that the kitchen was getting crowded.

In this middle of what was a rambling conversation, Rich said “think of us as produce suppliers.”  He said something like: “We bring you produce. Some of it will be awesome and you’ll want to use it immediately. Some will be moldy, or won’t fit in your recipes, or you won’t need any more of it.  And sometimes we won’t show up. Occasionally you’ll want to put us to work in the kitchen teaching you how to make a new dish with our produce. Other times you’ll politely ask us to get out of the kitchen so you can get some work done. And, ultimately, all of us, the investors (VC and angels), the entrepreneurs, and the employees are the owners!”

Give Your VC’s Assignments

Most VC’s will quickly say that they want to help the companies they invest in to success. Some will go further and say things like “I’ll do anything I can to help my companies.” Rarely have I heard a VC say something like “My plan is to just hang around, go to board meetings, ask a few nonsensical, low insight, rhetorical questions, eat the crummy food, and then disappear until the next board meeting.” However, as any entrepreneur who has ever worked with multiple VC’s knows, the statements a VC makes (or doesn’t make) doesn’t necessarily correspond to his behavior.

I think you can break this cycle early in the life of your relationship with your VC’s by giving them assignments. At the end of the first board meeting, spend some time talking about your expectations for your board members (including your VC’s), ask if they are reasonable, and then go around the table and ask each board member what they’d like to specifically help with between now and the next board meeting. Explain that you want to develop a cycle of accountability for each board member to the company and use this to:
(a) develop deep engagement from each board member between meetings,
(b) benefit from the experience and wisdom of each board member on a continual basis, and
(c) set a strong tone for the leadership team (and the company) that everyone has functional responsibilities that they are held accountable to.

Acknowledge that it will take a few board meetings to get into a good rhythm with this, but be clear that you’ll spend a little time at the next board meeting going through individual assignments, what was done, and what the new assignments are until the next board meeting.

The assignments should be specific – if they are general (such as “help with strategy” or “help with the financing”) they will be useless. Make sure the assignments play to the individual board members strengths and interests. They should provide leverage for the leadership team; not create make work. They should be impactful, but not mission critical.

In companies where the CEO hands out regular assignments, I’ve experienced an awesome tempo after about six months. The board members begin holding themselves accountable and the management team is much more comfortable working directly with the individual board members. Over time assignments become less “stiff” and the regimen of passing them out and reviewing them at the board meeting will fade away over time as everyone gets used to being held responsible for what they sign up for.

<section>Don’t Forget To Bootstrap</section>

Bootstrap: Using your own money or resources to start a business, eliminating debt or equity positions and increasing the future value of the business.

Boostrap: Smart.

I spent some time with a long-time friend and entrepreneur who I’ve funded in the past. He’s working on a new company which I think is really neat and I’m already a user of. He called me for feedback on his fundraising strategy as well as to see if it’s something that we’d be interested in investing in.

It was outside our themes and different than the type of business we invest in. Given our long relationship and the fact that he’s an awesome entrepreneur, I squinted hard at one of our themes, turned my head sideways, and decided to take a look. We spent a few days applying our process to it (each partner touches it and we give each other real time qualitative reactions) and quickly realized that it really wasn’t something for us as it was far outside anything that we felt like we could help much with beyond money and moral support (which my friend is going to get from me anyway.)

So – I sent my friend a note with my explanation for why we are passing. I offered to help with introductions because (a) he’s an awesome entrepreneur, (b) it’s a very fundable business – just not by us, and (c) I have a lot of confidence that he’ll build a successful business and there are several VCs who I know that I think would like what he’s working on.
His response was dynamite. It was:

No sweat. I knew it was a longshot, so I appreciate you even considering it. I know how many deals you have to pick from.
I’d like to take you up on your offer to help us get funded, but I have a better idea … help us avoid the need for funding (700 clients gets us to profitability).

He then went on to detail a handful of things he’d like me to do assuming that I’m a happy user of his product. All of them are easy, low maintenance for me, and in several cases actually benefit me.

I love that my friend is much more focused on ramping up his customers than raising money. It’s easy to get lost in the soup of “X company raised $Y” and forget that it’s not about fundraising, but building a business. When I think of some of my favorite TechStars companies, such as Occipital, they bootstrapped for several years before raising any money (well documented in the book Do More Faster) and even then could have easily built their business without raising any money.

Don’t forget to bootstrap.

<section>What’s The Best Structure For a Pre-VC Investment?</section>

I received the following question:

What’s the best/preferred structure of investment money pre-VC investment. We’re in the beginnings of raising angel capital (~500k) and were wondering what, if any, considerations we should make regarding the investments to allow for VC later. Should we take convertible loans or issue straight preferred stock? What are the other options that are out there for investment structure? Is it too much of a hassle to handle future investments when there is an “angel group (say 5 doctors banded together)” versus a singular angel?

My answer:

Assuming that you are planning on raising VC money some time in the future, there are two different typical structures for the first angel financing: (1) convertible debt and (2) preferred equity.

Convertible Debt: This is the easier approach of the two. In this case, the investment is in the form of a promissory note that converts into equity on the terms of a “qualified financing” (where qualified financing typically is defined by having a minimum amount – say $1m of total investment). The note will either convert at a discount to the price of the qualified financing (usually in the 20% – 40% range), will have warrant coverage (usually in the 20% to 40% range), or both. This discount and/or warrant coverage gives the angel investors some additional ownership in exchange for taking the early risk.  This note should be a real promissory note with the conversion and redemption characteristics clearly defined to protect both the investors and the entrepreneurs from any misunderstandings.

Preferred Equity: This is also known as a “light Series A” – it’s preferred stock that is similar to what a VC will get, but usually with lighter terms due to the relatively low valuation associated with it.  For a very young company, a $500k investment can receive between 25% and 50% of the equity in the company and, as a result, many of the terms associated with a typical VC investment are overkill.

While either of these work, you’ll find some angels that strongly prefer one over the other.  In addition, if you don’t believe you are going to raise additional VC money and will only be relying on additional small angel-type investments, the preferred equity approach is fairer to the investors as they’ll more clearly be participating in the upside on terms that are agreed to early in the life of the company.

Finally, I don’t think there is a difference between having “an angel group” vs. a single angel investor.  However, you should try to insure that all of your investors are accredited and – if some aren’t – make sure you understand the implications of this.

<section>Warning to All Entrepreneurs about Bad Investor Behavior</section>

I received an email from an entrepreneur today asking me about something that made my stomach turn. It’s a first time entrepreneur who is raising a modest (< $750k) seed round).There are two founders and they’ve been talking to a VC they met several months ago. Recently, the VC told them he was leaving his firm and wanted to help them out. This was obviously appealing until he dropped the bomb that prompted their question to me.

This soon to be ex-VC said something to the effect of “I can easily raise you money with a couple of phone calls, but I want to be a co-founder of the company and have an equal share of the business.”

In my email exchange with the entrepreneur, I asked two questions. The first was “is he going to be full-time with the company?” – and the other was – “Do you want him as a third full-time partner?” The answer was no and no. More specifically, the VC was positioning himself as “the founder that would help raise the money.”

I dug a little deeper to find out who the person was in case it was just a random dude looking for gig flow. David Cohen, the CEO of TechStars, has written extensively about this in our book Do More Faster – for example, see the chapter “Beware of Angel Investors Who Aren’t.” I was shocked when I saw the name of the person and the firm he has been with (and is leaving) – it’s someone who has been in the VC business for a while and should know better.

I find this kind of behavior disgusting. If the person was offering to put in $25k – $100k in the round and then asking for an additional 1% or 2% as an “active advisor” (beyond whatever the investment bought) to help out with the company, I’d still be skeptical of the equity ask at this stage and encourage the founders to (a) vest it over time and (b) make sure there was a tangible commitment associated with it that was different from other investors. Instead, given the facts I was given, my feedback was to run far away, fast.

Entrepreneurs – beware. This is the kind of behavior that gives investors a bad name. Unfortunately, my impression of this particular person is that he’s not a constructive early stage investor but rather someone who is trying to prey on naive entrepreneurs. Whenever the markets heat up, this kind of thing starts happening. Just be careful out there.

<chapter>Chapter 9: Keeping Your You-Know-What Together</chapter>

<section>Managing Priorities</section>

Amid the passion of being an entrepreneur, don’t forget about the “mundane” stuff that keeps your business viable. The following tips on time management, accounting and administration will make sure you have the foundation to support your “burning” ambition.

During an intense but enjoyable and satisfying business trip, I was getting ready to go to bed in order to wake up in time to make my 6:40am flight. I was rolling my one remaining priority for the week around in my head. I was thinking to myself, “two down, one to go.” And I realized I have been using a construct of “three priorities a week max” for a long time.

Now, I do a lot more than three things a week. But, on Monday mornings as I’m going through my daily information routine, I usually carve out a few minutes to make sure I have my priorities for the week firmly lodged in my brain. I limit myself to three as I don’t think you can have more than three “highest priorities” at any given time. When I start the week, I make a clear mental commitment to get these priorities (or P1′s in Zynga speak) done. Each day when I wake up, I think about what I need to do to get closure on these priorities.

Some weeks I have three, others I have one or two. I always have at least one. And they are always important. Occasionally I can’t get one done and it rolls over into the next week, but once something becomes a P1 it stays a P1 until it gets done. And I can never have more than three P1′s. And they should all be able to be completed by the end of the week. But most importantly, they are clearly defined and easily explained (e.g. if you walk up to me and ask me what my P1s are for this week, I should be able to recite them without thinking.)

While I have plenty of things that I’m working on that have a much longer arch than one week, I find this weekly rhythm to be very grounding. I have a clear sense of accomplishment on a weekly basis, I clear the decks of big priorities, and I regularly tackle hard stuff that just needs to get done.

I also have many more than three things that I complete each week, including things that regularly come up that are as important (or even more important) that whatever I’ve defined as my P1s for that week. But I don’t shuffle the priorities around – by having the big ones for the week set at the beginning of the week, I have a clear set to focus on whenever I need to re-ground myself.

I kept saying to myself: “One more to go. I’ve got two days to get it done. And I’ve got plenty of time on my remaining two plane flights to knock it off.”

<section>Focus On Outcomes, Not Organization</section>

I had a great breakfast meeting at the Cambridge Marriott with Michael Schrage, a research fellow at MIT. We had never met before and I loved the conversation – his brain was bubbling with ideas that are relevant to many of the things I’m interested in, he challenged some of my thinking, and we had a deep and awesome conversation about open source hardware, makers, and MakerBot.

Raj Bhargava (who recently co-founded two companies I’ve invested in – Yesware and SkedulMe) sent me a blog post by Michael titled Tip for Getting More Organized: Don’t. In it Michael makes the argument that the notion of spending time each day organizing your tasks, the concept of email folders, and the idea of productively organizing yourself is obsolete. The money quote at the end is:

The essential takeaway is that the new economics of personal productivity mean that the better organized we try to become, the more wasteful and inefficient we become. We’ll likely get more done better if we give less time and thought to organization and greater reflection and care to desired outcomes. Our job today and tomorrow isn’t to organize ourselves better; it’s to get the right technologies that respond to our personal productivity needs. It’s not that we’re becoming too dependent on our technologies to organize us; it’s that we haven’t become dependent enough.

I couldn’t agree more. I spend almost no time “organizing my tasks.” In fact, I no longer have a task list. I have outcomes I’m going after. They fit within a daily, weekly, quarterly, and annual tempo. The daily and weekly outcomes are dynamic – I have to think about them regularly and they change and shift around (I have new ones each day and new ones each week.) I call these my Daily P1s and my Weekly P1s (which I wrote about recently in a post titled Managing Priorities)- the daily ones are the three things I want to accomplish before I go to sleep; the weekly ones are the three things I want to accomplish each week before Monday morning.

But that’s it. I have a daily schedule that is highly structured (and managed by my assistant) so I don’t have to spend a millisecond thinking about who I need to meet with, where I need to be, or what I need to schedule for later. If you know me, you know that I just “go where my schedule tells me to.”

I love the notion of focusing on outcomes rather than organization. For as long as I’ve been an adult, I’ve been hearing about, reading, thinking about, and experimenting with different technology to be “more organized and productive.” I’m an aggressive user of whatever exists and when I reflect on where I’m at, I definitely feel like I’ve gotten to the place where I’m spending almost all of my time and energy on outcomes and achieving them, not on organizing myself.

If you are someone who spends 30 minutes or more a day “organizing yourself,” I encourage you to step back and think about what you could change and how that might shift you from focusing on organizing to working toward outcomes. It’s liberating.

<section>Financial Fitness for Entrepreneurs</section>

I wrote the following article on “financial fitness for entrepreneurs” for the Kauffman Foundation’s Entreworld web site. I got a lot of positive feedback and it ended up in USA Today. It’s aimed at any entrepreneur – not just those running venture funded companies. While it’s aimed at an early stage entrepreneur, I think it’s useful whether you have one employee (you, the founder) or thousands of employees in your business.

While creating a growth business can be exhilarating, many entrepreneurs – especially those starting a company for the first time – don’t pay enough attention to some core issues surrounding the financial management of their businesses.

Often, founders don’t have formal training in finance – they’re “techies” launching the next Apple Computer or Netscape, professionals putting together advertising, management consulting, or human resources agencies, or super-salesmen types who’ve figured out how to sell a pizza or deliver a package faster, better and cheaper. Always, they’re intimately involved with their core product or service. Often, they are too busy to burrow into the details of some of the company’s functions, of which finance is the most critical.

These entrepreneurs are savvy enough to know they must work with financial professionals, such as their CFO and outside auditors or CPA’s. However, no matter what their background or inclination about finance, founders need to have a working understanding of the basics. An elementary level of financial literacy means they’ll work more intelligently with their financial advisors and become the first line of defense for spotting potential problems in the young company.

What follows are some fundamental financial tenets that all early-stage entrepreneurs should be aware of, understand, and heed.
	•	Cash is king: No matter what, don’t run out of money. Nothing else in this article matters if you run out of money. This means know your burn rate (the net cash that is flowing out of your business each month) and be aware that your low cash point for any given month may not be at the end of the month. In other words, don’t get caught planning based on full month figures only to find that you do not have enough money to pay your most important vendor on the 15th because your customers don’t pay you until the 30th.
	•	Put in real financial systems from day one: Lots of entrepreneurs figure that they’ll “get around to putting in real financial systems someday soon.” Of course, that rarely happens, especially if no one on the founding team has a strong financial background. The cliché, “It’s better to build on a strong foundation,” applies. Put the foundation in place early so that as your business grows, you are on solid financial footing.
	•	Measure everything: If you have real financial systems in place, you can measure everything. Be obsessive about it. Some things that you’ll measure will be similar to what most other businesses measure, such as your P&L, balance sheet, and cash flow statements. Other things will be unique to your business – oriented around your specific customers or products. As your business grows, make sure you evolve and expand what you measure to best reflect the current state of your business. Look especially for metrics that will help tell you where your business is going, not just where it has come from. Financial systems can and should capture more than just historical financial results.
	•	Build an annual operating plan: Be disciplined about creating an annual operating plan and budget every year. You should have it finished before January 1. This is your easiest benchmark to measure against – your own expectations. If you don’t set them, you won’t know how you did.
	•	Use your vendors to fund your business: Vendors love to get paid on time (or early). However, as a young business, your vendors will appreciate consistency of payment over timeliness. While most vendors will want to be paid within 30 days (or less), it’s typical to stretch payables 45 to 60 days. The key is to pay consistently – if you have a vendor from whom you continually use services or buy products, don’t store up your bills and pay in one lump sum sporadically. Instead, send regular payments. Also, don’t dodge calls from vendors about paying late. Tell them when you are going to pay them, and then make sure you follow through.
	•	Use your customers to fund your business: Customers – especially ones that value your products and services – will often be willing to pay on very short terms. Don’t be bashful about asking them to prepay, especially if you are a service business.
	•	Be careful of personal guarantees: Banks love personal guarantees. Entrepreneurs hate them. You should avoid them if you can – only sign one as a last resort. You are already investing a huge amount of your personal assets and energy in your business. If you can’t get financing based on the strength of your business, you should question whether it’s the right kind of financing. In the upside scenario, when your business succeeds, the personal guarantee doesn’t matter. It’s the downside case you should be worried about, because you could lose major personal assets like your house.
	•	If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is: While this is generally true in life, it’s especially true concerning financial issues surrounding an early stage company. Your books should always balance, financings will always have a cost, and investors are always going to have strings attached to their money. Ask questions, be wary, and know what you are getting into.
	•	Finance your business appropriately for what you are trying to create: One of the most common mistakes an early stage entrepreneur makes is trying to raise the wrong kind of money for the business. It makes no sense for a service business that could potentially be a $5 million company within three years to try to raise $10 million of venture capital. Correspondingly, it doesn’t make sense for a capital-intensive company that needs to build a plant to raise $250,000 of angel money.
	•	Choose professionals carefully: It may be tempting to use your wife’s brother’s friend’s neighbor as your lawyer, because he will give you a great rate and you see him at the neighborhood barbecue, but you get what you pay for. The same is true for accountants and other services that your business will use. Find professionals who know what they are doing and have experience with young companies.
	•	Don’t take anything for granted: Double-check everything. If you have the right systems (did I mention that you should have good systems?), this is easy. If you don’t, reread the second bullet point and put in the right systems.
	•	Pay your taxes on time: Unlike customers and vendors, our local, state, and federal tax authorities don’t appreciate being used as financing sources for your business. In addition to potentially incurring onerous penalties, missing or delaying tax payments is often a serious crime.

That’s the list. Read it over, familiarize yourself with it, and begin developing a lay entrepreneur’s understanding of finance. You’ll then be able to work deftly with your pros to put the company of your dreams on the sound financial footing necessary for success.

<section>Setting Up Your Accounting System</section>

Let’s say we had two burning entrepreneur partners, Dick and Jane. They had limited formal business accounting experience, but they both knew how to balance a checkbook. They reached out to their friend John, a CFO at a late-stage VC-backed company in Boston that was about to file an S-1 to go public. John took an hour out of his day to do a conference call with Dick and gave them advice on how to set up their accounting system. His advice included the following:
	1.	Set up a double-entry accounting system and use it to track all financial transactions.
	2.	Build a financial model that forecasts the P&L. Revenues and costs should both be based off of a robust set of assumptions. This should tie to your GL for “Actuals” (i.e. historical data).
	3.	Be sure to use accrual accounting, not cash accounting.
	4.	Tie the P&L forecast to the Balance Sheet and Cash Flow Statement and generate snapshots of what the Financial Statements will look like each year for the next 5 years. Create monthly snapshots on a rolling 12 month basis.
	5.	Anytime the financial model indicates that SayAhh will run out of cash, determine how you will raise capital to ensure liquidity and be sure to properly account for the debt or equity transaction on the balance sheet and Cap Table.
	6.	Tie each round of funding to a set of key milestones in the development of your product/business.

John also mentioned a bunch of other stuff that Dick didn’t write down because they weren’t really sure what it meant, but it included phrases like 409a and VSOE. Feeling overwhelmed, Dick emailed his friend Josh, the CEO of an early-stage startup in Boulder, to see how they figured out all of this stuff. He summarized Dick’s advice and Josh replied: “That’s great advice and you should do all of that stuff – eventually. But, for now, focus on the following:”
	1.	Make sure you both have business credit/debit cards and that you use them (or checks) for all transactions.
	2.	Setup a simple accounting system like QuickBooks and sync it with your bank account. At the end of each week, make sure you’ve properly labeled each transaction using the QuickBooks Chart of Accounts. This takes a little getting used to, but you’ll pick it up. Ask me if you have questions.
	3.	QuickBooks allows you to forecast expenses. Think through all of the expenses that you anticipate over the next 12 months and enter them. Update this every time you become aware of new transactions and maintain this on a rolling basis. QuickBooks will show you if/when you will run out of cash within the next 12 months.
	4.	Build a plan as to how you will inject more cash into the business any time QuickBooks shows you running out of cash, and be sure to start raising any needed cash well in advance.

Dick and Jane followed Josh’s advice. It required a small investment of time and money to get QuickBooks up and running, but it was a manageable distraction from building their core product.

To be successful, you need to know about a wide range of issues affecting your business. However, you do not have to become an expert on each and the degree to which you need to understand various issues evolves along with your business. It is easy to get caught up in all the administrivia of of forming a company, building a business plan, and developing financial forecasts that you fail to spend time building your product.

How do you know what matters most when? This is where developing a network of trusted and qualified mentors comes in handy. While John was trying to be helpful, his advice missed the mark because he didn’t have a lot of experience at the early stages. In contrast, Josh was an experienced entrepreneur who had started several companies and likely learned his lessons through experience. As you build your business, surround yourself with as many Josh’s as you can. And, as you grow, make sure you find mentors like John to help you at at the appropriate stages.

As Josh suggested, when you first start your business you should focus on building systems and processes that allow you to accurately capture as much data as possible from the start. QuickBooks and other accounting software programs will do this for your finances, but you should also implement tools for tracking other key metrics (e.g., customer behavior, support inquiries, marketing analytics). You can and will become increasingly sophisticated in analyzing and interpreting that data over time, but you cannot analyze it if you do not have it.

Additionally, at all points in the development of your startup – including on Day 1 – you should focus intently on forecasting your cash flows as accurately as you possibly can. Running out of cash will either kill your company or force you into a very painful financing round. Know exactly when you run out of money, well before the time you hit a wall and go splat.

See Dick burn. See Jane burn. The end.

<section>Have You Ever Failed?</section>

As I was going through my morning information routine, I noticed a number of articles that I’d put in the “how to not fail” bucket.  I read a few of these and noticed a consistent tone of “failure is bad – here’s how to avoid it.”

Throughout my life and career I’ve failed at many things, large and small.  I view failure as a fundamental part of every entrepreneurial endeavor, whether it’s a failed project, hire, partnership, relationship, lead, customer, or even the entire business.  One of the great things about entrepreneurship in America is that failure is an accepted part of the cycle.

I used to say something like “one of the great things about America is that failure is acceptable.”  When great people fail, they acknowledge it, learn from it, get up, dust themselves off, and get back at it.  If you accept reality, you can fail gracefully and hopefully learn something from it.  It’s never fun – and it can be really stressful / painful / emotionally hard – but it’s a part of learning, evolving, and growing stronger and better.

While I fail at stuff regularly, I’ll never forget the deepest cycle of failure I’ve been in to date.  As the Internet bubble popped exploded, company after company that I was an investor in failed.  As I grappled with this, I felt like I had been run over by a truck.  After I got up, a steamroller came and flattened me.  As I was peeling myself off the ground, the steamroller backed up and smushed me again.  Then, I realized I was lying on top of a hole and the top fell in and I tumbled down to the bottom.  As I was looking up at the sky, some jerk came into view, poured gasoline onto me, and then dropped a flaming stick on top of me.

By the summer of 2001, I realized that every day had been worse than the previous day.  I no longer got up in the morning and said “ok – today will be better than yesterday;” instead I resolved myself that every day would be worse, until it eventually got better.  Then 9/11 happened.

I hung in there, kept getting up every day and doing my best, working hard to make informed and intelligent decisions, and helping all of the companies I was an investor in however I could.  A few more failed, but a nice number survived and ultimately thrived.  Things eventually got better.  And I learned a lot.

In my worldview, the best leaders understand that failure is an integral part of things. The cliche “fail fast” is one of my favorites.  When things aren’t working, deal with it. Another is the famous line from Atlas Shrugged: “Nobody stays here by faking reality in any manner whatever.”  Denying that failure is part of our existence is akin to faking reality.

While I accept “the experience of failure” feels “negative / crappy / depressing / hard / sucky,” I don’t believe that “failure is bad.”  Deal with it, learn from it, pick yourself up, and try again.

<chapter>Chapter 10: Burning Examples</chapter>

<section>Oblong Dazzles More than Just Me</section>

The following are examples of burning entrepreneurs, evidenced in companies that are supernova hot. Pay attention to the focus, the product excellence and the determination not to suck.

If you are a long time reader of my writing, you know that I’m a huge believer that the way we interact with computers in 20 years will be radically different than how we interact with them today.  I’ve put my money where my mouth is as Foundry Group has invested in a number of companies around human computer interaction, including Oblong.

For the past few years, every time someone talks about next generation user interfaces, a reference to the movie Minority Report pops up.  Sometimes the writer gets this right and links it back to John Underkoffler, the co-founder of Oblong, but many times they don’t.  The NY Times got it right in their article You, Too, Can Soon Be Like Tom Cruise in ‘Minority Report’.


That’s a picture of John Underkoffler at Ted on Friday giving one of his jaw dropping demos of Oblong’s g-speak spatial operating environment.  Lest you think this is science fiction, I can assure you that Oblong has several major customers, is generating meaningful revenue, and is poised to enter several mainstream markets with g-speak derived products.

The company has been steadily building momentum over the past few years since we invested.  The TechCrunch article The iPad Is Step 1 In The Future Of Computing. This Is Step 2 (Or 3) gives you a little of the history.  More of the history is at Oblong’s post origins: arriving here that go back to 1994.  I personally have stories going back to 1984 when I first met John, but we’ll save those for another day.

While there is an amazing amount of interesting stuff suddenly going on around HCI (and we have invested in a few other companies around this), Oblong shipped steps 2 and 3 while most were working on step 1.  As John likes to say, “the old model of one human, one machine, one mouse, one screen is passe.”

<section>Rally Software Builds a Great Company... and the Media Agrees</section>

Lots of little things go into building a great company over the long term.  Rally Software is one that I’m proud to have been involved in from the beginning. I remember when Ryan Martens, the founder, would sit for entire days in a small conference room near my office covering the white boards on the walls with his scribblings.

By 2010, Rally was a 150-person company that planned to add another 75 people on the heels of its $16 million financing led by Greylock.  And between that milestone and their birth in 2002, Rally had 17 babies (well, people that work for Rally have had the babies, but you probably figured that out.)  Rally’s leadership team decided to do something about this. KUSA ran this terrific feature on Rally’s baby-friendly culture, which CNN picked up.

http://www.cnn.com/video/?/video/living/2010/02/05/dnt.office.baby.room.kusa

Nicely done Tim, Ryan, and everyone else at Rally.  Now you’ve just got to get these kids using software from Kerpoof at an early age. I wonder how Agile Parenthood works?

<section>In Praise of Return Path and SendGrid: Implementing Social Media’s Secret Weapon</section>

Fred Wilson had an excellent post titled Social Media’s Secret Weapon – Email. I completely agree that email is the key communications channel for social media and have written about this before in posts like 100% Click Through Rate, Email – The Original Social Graph and Email Is Still The Best Login.

I’ve been investing in email related stuff for over 15 years going back to Email Publishing, my very first Boulder-based investment which I believe was the very first email service provider (ESP) and was acquired by MessageMedia which was then bought by Doubleclick. Fred and I are both investors in Return Path which he calls out in his post as the category creator and market leader in email deliverability. I love Return Path as a company and am incredibly proud of what they’ve done as a business.

My partners and I have continued to invest aggressively in what we believe is social media’s secret weapon which we refer to as the comm channel in a hat tip to the TV show 24. In Fred’s post, the comm channel is email. Our investment here is in SendGrid, a company that came out of TechStars Boulder 2009 and is one of the white hot companies in Boulder. They directly address the problem Fred describes which every software developer knows is a pain in the ass, uninteresting, hard to do well, but needs to be done right. Every web app sends transactional email – rather than build all the code yourself, just let SendGrid to it. They are now doing it for over 24,000 companies, sending out over 60 million transactional emails a day, and just sent their 10 billionth transactional email.

But email isn’t the only comm channel. Everyone that uses apps on a mobile phone is likely experiencing push notifications as an increasingly important as a form of engagement. While mobile phones used to only really work effectively with SMS, you now have SMS, email, and push notifications. So we invested in Urban Airship who does for push notifications what SendGrid does for email. Like SendGrid, they are growing like crazy, are in use by over 10,000 customers and have sent over 3 billion push notifications.

My message to all web developers – if you are serious about what you are doing, focus on your app. Don’t waste precious development time on all the activities around the app. You likely no longer sit around with a screwdriver setting up a server in a datacenter – instead you are using a cloud provider like Rackspace or Amazon.  Don’t spent your time coding up an email notification infrastructure – use SendGrid. And if you are a mobile developer, don’t waste your time writing a bunch of code for push notifications – use Urban Airship.

Most importantly, don’t ignore the thing that will actually make your web app get adoption and retention – comm channels!

How Trada Works – Now Improved with Bing

Trada – one of our investments that is based in Boulder – has been absolutely killing it.  It was started by Niel Robertson, who we’ve worked with in various forms going back to the mid-1990’s.  When Niel first came up with the idea, he and my partner Seth Levine spent a few months really going deep and figuring out how (PPC) pay per click marketing campaigns (e.g. Google AdWords) worked and whether a crowdsourcing approach could materially improve their performance.  It turns out that it does – if you are doing any sort of PPC marketing you will see dramatic improvements by using Trada’s service. 

And – if you are a PPC expert, you can make extra bucks by being one of the optimizers for Trada’s service.  But don’t take my word for it, hear it directly from Niel the scarf maker.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQtTd4zJf9k

Trada announced that in addition to Google and Yahoo, they support Bing.  Rather than putting out a turgid press release, Niel and Seth made a second video in a series that continues the saga of Niel the scarf maker.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9DTvAahV1Ck

If your company does anything around PPC marketing, take a look at Trada.  And – if you run into Seth on the street, ask him what he thinks of the Yankees.

<section>Gnip Is On Fire</section>

One of my favorite times for me in the life of a company is when it finds its sweet spot and really turns on the juice. Over the past year, we’ve had a number of our Boulder-based investments find this magic moment, including Trada and SendGrid. The most recent Boulder-based company to really hit its stride is Gnip.

Gnip started around 2008 and is a testament to our belief at Foundry Group that it often takes several years for a brand new company to really find its mojo. While Gnip was building a business based on the idea that led to its creation, like most firms breaking new ground it had its share of bumps along the way.

The first version of the product was based on an architectural approach that didn’t aptly satisfy all players in the ecosystem and wasn’t flexible enough. This led to a reset of the business, including a layoff of almost half the team (who were quickly absorbed into a number of other local Boulder companies, including several that we funded) and a different approach to the product. This approach worked much better, but by this point one of the co-founders was frustrated with the customer dynamics (all business facing) and decided to leave to start a new consumer-facing business (he left on good terms, we are still good friends, and he’s much happier today).

At this point, the other co-founder, Jud Valeski, stepped up to be the CEO. Jud is an extremely experienced CTO / technical product manager and developer, but had never been a CEO. The investors in Gnip committed to supporting Jud in any way he needed and he’s done a spectacular job of building the product, growing the team, negotiating several significant deals including the first Twitter data resyndication deal, and unleashing a very compelling set of products on the world. His one-year CEO anniversary is approaching, and things are going great.

The beginning of 2011 was pleasantly insane. Gnip added customers at rate that any investor would be proud of, was executing flawlessly on the product and operations side as it scaled up, and posted month over month growth numbers that put it in the “they are killing it” category. Oh, and they hired as fast as they can find great people; across the spectrum (business, sales, & engineering).

I’m super proud of Jud and the team he’s built at Gnip. I expect we’ll look back and see how Gnip went from a highly product development focused company to a company that was firing on all cylinders. Chalk up another substantial software / Internet company for Boulder.

<chapter>Conclusion</chapter>

<section>What It Is To Burn</section>

Behold the burning entrepreneur. Everything you’ve heard about leaders of successful startups is true. They are a different kind of people. However, don’t think X-Men. (or should I have said Johnny Storm of the Fantastic Four?) Burning entrepreneurs don’t have mutant strands of DNA. They aren’t born to greatness. Their qualities are learned and practiced. That means you can be a burning entrepreneur too.

I’ve had the thrill and honor of observing hundreds of entrepreneurs and funding many of the best. After starting companies myself, I decided I never wanted to climb out of the trenches. This has allowed me to see the components of successful entrepreneurialism in myself and others. There are common elements and repeated motifs.

You need passion and control. How do you combine such different qualities? Be in love with your business and don’t halt your commitment at 99%. You need to be a different type of leader. How do you accomplish this “easier-said-than-done” mission? Make everyone in your organization the CEO of his/her job and tune out the distractions of bubble predictors, Wall Street palm readers, and other extraneous naysayers. Want to blow away your customers? Focus on your product and replace stale marketing with people-oriented demand generation. Are money worries strangling your muse? Manage your financiers AND your finances.

There’s a reason so many rock songs are about fire and burning (and you thought it was all about sex and cars). Think 1965. The Beatles have established the beachhead and The Stones, The Who and everyone else waving a Union Jack and a Rickenbacker is charging in. So play today’s rock and roll. Join the startup invasion. Start burning!
